Phalcon PHP Framework: A Quick Look
By:Aaron Singline
aaron.singline@otago.ac.nz

=============
Introduction
=============
PHP frameworks abound and usually there is nothing special about them.  At the
moment the flavour of the month seems to be Laravel but I recently got to play
with a new framework called Phalcon (phalconphp.com).  It's fast and easy to get
off the ground.  Did I mention it is fast (we'll get to that later).  Currently
as of writing the stable release is 1.3.2 but it is still very actively being
developed.

===========
The Basics
===========

Phalcon is a MVC framework much in the same line as Laravel.  It has some
striking similarities mostly through following best practices.

As you would expect it does a lot of heavy lifting for you and lets you just get
on with coding.  Of course with the heavy lifing comes the ability to extend the
prebuilt classes and tweak the functionality just how you'd like.

==================
Under the Surface
==================
Now comes the fun bit and I've held it off the secret to this framewor more than
long enough.  Phalcon is a C library that you install into PHP as an extension.
"Say what?" I hear you say.  Yes that is right it installs as an extension and
is a compiled library.

"So what does that mean?" I also hear you say.  It means that it is quick, very
quick.  Being compiled means the framework is working at a lower level than just
native PHP.

However it also means some slightly trickier installation. You don't just
download an archive file and extract it to a folder.  No some most cases you
compile it on your machine and quite frankly that would have scared me away if
the instructions weren't so good. Also, by the time I got to the part about
having to compile, I was already intrigued enough to continue.

After getting over that the next problem I had was that my IDE of choice,
Komodo Edit, wasn't able to use the extension to have all those lovely
autocompletes.  However that was also solved by getting the Developer Tools
(phalconphp.com/en/download/tools) and pointing it at the folder that is
included.

============
Handy Tools
============
For a start the documentation is simply brilliant.  It is nicely laid out and
clear.  This was what really got me interested in the first place.  If a project
has good documentation it shows that people really care about it.  So much so
that they are prepared to do good documentation in this case.  I especially
enjoyed the examples as, personally, I like to learn by seeing code.

As I mentioned the Developer Tools is also available.  It has some interesting
scaffolding tools to get you started.  However once you've used the scaffolding
you'll probably find that you will need to change quite a bit to get the code
that satisfies your requirements.

It does a good job getting you started though and, as it is pointed out, you 
will probably be making most things by hand once you have the hang of it.

===========
The Future
===========
As previously mentioned Phalcon is still under active development.  Beta
releases of version 2.0 has been released along with improvements it also
introduces a new language called Zephir (zephir-lang.com).  Zephir's goal is to
be a compliment to C and PHP.

===========
Conclusion
===========
Good: Great documentation.  Easy to get a page up and running quickly.

The Bad: Hard to install for novices or those not too familiar with digging
around in a server.

So all in all if you on the look out for a fast PHP framework that is feature
rich Phalcon may well be worth investing some time into.

Finally I must mention that the main author does do Google Hangouts from time to
time.  If you do get into Phalcon I'd encourage you to watch them and
participate if you feel so inclined.  This is a person making the effort to 
reach out to the community and that should always be encouraged.
